blog: local storage features go beta (#27240)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2021-04-15-local-storage-features-go-beta.md

---
layout: blog
title: 'Local Storage: Storage Capacity Tracking, Distributed Provisioning and Generic Ephemeral Volumes hit Beta
date: 2021-04-15

> slug: 2021-04-15-local-storage-features-go-beta

Author: But I still need to know the date in advance, right? It's here in `date:` and in the file name.

Which date should I use? 2021-04-15 is what I picked more or less arbitrarily.

> slug: 2021-04-15-local-storage-features-go-beta

Reviewer: AIUI it's not vital to get the date to match the actual publication date we eventually pick, as we can correct this in a follow-up commit.

> slug: 2021-04-15-local-storage-features-go-beta

Reviewer 2: @pohly : This is scheduled to be published on 14th April, 2021 per the sheet [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1-rFkGmpyDN39gY2M_RX6Ugs_AIig9GXw1FkRLWWmWfw/edit?usp=drivesdk) You can enter the date whenever you are committing the next set of changes.

> slug: 2021-04-15-local-storage-features-go-beta

Author: Off-by-one error :sweat_smile: 

It doesn't look like there is further feedback on the PR, so I changed the date now.

---

 **Authors:** Patrick Ohly (Intel)

> Several features are getting promoted to beta in Kubernetes 1.21 and

Author: So "generic ephemeral volumes" and "storage capacity tracking" are clearly getting promoted now and can be named here.

I'm less sure how to describe "distributed provisioning". It was a new feature in external-provisioner v2.1.0. I suppose because it wasn't declared as "alpha" at that time, it immediately became a stable feature? We don't really have a stability tracking process per feature in the sidecars.

> Several features are getting promoted to beta in Kubernetes 1.21 and

Author: I've rewritten the introduction.

the associated CSI external-provisioner release that simplify the

> development of Container Storage Interface (CSI) drivers which manage

Reviewer: Optionally, make “Container Storage Interface” a hyperlink.

storage locally on a node.

This blog post explains how such drivers worked before and how these
features help make drivers simpler.

> ## The good...

Author: I guess the movie reference was too obscure... :sweat_smile: 

I've relabeled the section to "Current status", "Improvements in Kubernetes 1.21" and "Known issues".

There are drivers for local storage, like TopoLVM for traditional

> disks and PMEM-CSI for persistent memory. They work and are ready for

Author: Done.

usage today also on older Kubernetes release, but making that possible
was not trivial.

The first problem is volume provisioning: it is handled through the
Kubernetes control plane. Some central component must react to

> persistent volume claims (PVC) and create volumes. Usually, that is

Reviewer: If you want to, you can make persistent volume claims be a link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#persistentvolumeclaims

> handled by a central deployment of the external-provisioner and a CSI

Reviewer: I'd make this instance of “external-provisioner” by a hyperlink, too.

Author: I was using it here in the general sense of "some external provisioner", but I agree, it looks too much like a typo. Changed to external-provisioner.

driver component that then connects to the storage backplane. But for
local storage, there is no such backplane.

TopoLVM solved this by having its different components communicate
with each other through the Kubernetes API server by creating and
reading custom resources. So although TopoLVM is based on CSI, a
standard that is independent of a particular container orchestrator,
TopoLVM only works on Kubernetes.

PMEM-CSI created its own storage backplane with communication through
gRPC calls. Securing that communication depends on TLS certificates,
which made driver deployment more complicated.

The next problem is scheduling. When volumes get created independently
of pods ("immediate binding"), the CSI driver must pick a node without
knowing anything about the pod(s) that are going to use it. Topology
information then forces those pods to run on the node where the volume
was created. If other resources like RAM or CPU are exhausted there,
the pod cannot start. This can be avoided by configuring in the

> storage class that volume creation is meant to wait for the first pod

Reviewer: I'd write:
```suggestion
StorageClass that volume creation is meant to wait for the first pod
```
to highlight that StorageClass is an API and an object kind in Kubernetes.

Author: Also for "persistent volume claim", I suppose. I changed both.

that uses a volume (`volumeBinding: WaitForFirstConsumer`). In that
mode, the Kubernetes scheduler tentatively picks a node based on other
constraints and then the external provisioner is asked to create a
volume such that it is usable there. If local storage is exhausted,
the provisioner can ask for another scheduling round. But without
information about available capacity, the scheduler might always pick
the same unsuitable node.

Both TopoLVM and PMEM-CSI solved this with scheduler extenders. This
works, but it is hard to configure when deploying the driver because
communication between kube-scheduler and the driver is very dependent
on how the cluster was set up.

A more common use case for local storage are ephemeral volumes that
get created for a pod and destroyed together with it. The initial API
for supporting ephemeral volumes with CSI drivers (hence called "*CSI*
ephemeral volumes") was designed for light-weight volumes where volume
creation is unlikely to fail. Volume creation happens after pods have

> been permanently scheduled onto a node, in contrast to the the

Author: Fixed.

traditional provisioning where volume creation is tried before
scheduling a pod onto a node. CSI drivers must be modified to support
"CSI ephemeral volumes", which was done for TopoLVM and PMEM-CSI. But
due to the design of the feature in Kubernetes, pods can get stuck
permanently if storage capacity runs out on a node. The scheduler
extenders try to avoid that, but cannot be 100% reliable.

## ... the better...

Starting with external-provisioner v2.1.0, released for Kubernetes
1.20, provisioning can be handled by external-provisioner instances
that get deployed together with the CSI driver on each node

> ("distributed provisioning"). There is no need anymore to have a

Author: No.

> ("distributed provisioning"). There is no need anymore to have a

Author: The connection only is that unless you use both, you still need a central component.

central component and thus no need for communication between nodes, at
least not for provisioning.

A scheduler extender still needs some way to find out about capacity
on each node. When PMEM-CSI switched to distributed provisioning in
v0.9.0, this was done by querying the metrics data exposed by the
local driver containers. But even better is to eliminate the need for

> a scheduler extender completely. Storage capacity tracking, promoted

Reviewer: Is there a page that “Storage capacity tracking” could hyperlink to?

Author: Yes. https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-capacity/ and https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/09/01/ephemeral-volumes-with-storage-capacity-tracking/ is what I added as links.

the cluster autoscaler needs information about a node that hasn't been
created yet, it will currently not scale up a cluster for pods that
need volumes. There is an [idea how to provide that
information](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/pull/3887), but
more work is needed in that area.

Distributed snapshotting and resizing are not currently supported. It
should be doable to adapt the respective sidecar and there are
tracking issues for external-snapshotter and external-resizer open
already, they just need some volunteer.

The recovery from a bad scheduling decising can fail for pods with
multiple volumes, in particular when those volumes are local to nodes:
if one volume can be created and then storage is insufficient for
another volume, the first volume continues to exist and forces the
scheduler to put the pod onto the node of that volume. There is an
idea how do deal with this, [rolling back the provision of the
volume](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1703), but
this is only in the very early stages of brainstorming and not even a
merged KEP yet. For now it is better to avoid creating pods with more

> than one volume.

Author: Pod scheduling with more than one unbound volume is also "broken" without these features. It's not a limitation of these features in particular but rather of Kubernetes storage support in general.

I am not sure how relevant it is in practice. How many volumes do you expect per pod? Do you have actual examples?

## Enabling the new features and next steps

Because the Kubernetes features are now beta, no changes are needed

> there anymore when deploying a Kubernetes 1.21 cluster. Generic

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
there any more when deploying a Kubernetes 1.21 cluster. Generic
```

Author: Fixed.

> ephemeral volumes also work without changes in CSI drivers.

Reviewer 3: It is not clear to me how the Generic ephemeral volume feature can be used by itself and what is the benefit.
It's good to clarify what is the benefit of each of these two features when used separately or together.

Author: > It is not clear to me how the Generic ephemeral volume feature can be used by itself and what is the benefit.

It might be as simple as "previously you couldn't do ephemeral volumes with CSI driver XYZ, now you can"... Or were you wondering why someone might want to do that? One use case is local scratch space.

I mention that use case now when introducing ephemeral volumes and also linked to the previous blog post which had a more in-depth explanation.

For storage capacity tracking and distributed provisioning, CSI driver
developers must change how their driver gets deployed. The

> external-provisioner documentation explains both.

Author: Added "These two features are independent, therefore it is okay to enable only one of them." and rewrote the section so that it is more obvious which words are now links to the relevant documentation.

[SIG-Storage](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage)
would like to hear from you if you are using these new features. A
description of your workload would be very useful to validate design
decisions, set up performance tests and eventually promote these

> features to GA.

Reviewer 3: How do people provide feedback?  Attend SIG-Storage meetings or provide feedback on slack/mailing list?

Author: I was unsure. Do we have a preference?

Author: Added all three (email, Slack, meeting).

## Acknowledgements

Thanks a lot to the members of the community who have contributed to these
features or given feedback including members of SIG-Scheduling, SIG-Auth,

> and of course SIG-Storage!

Reviewer: In publicity, we usually write SIG names without a “-”.

Author: Done.
